
**Networking:** Networking involves connecting multiple devices to share resources, exchange information, and communicate effectively.

**Protocols** are rules that govern how devices communicate and share information across a network. Examples of protocols include:

- IP – Internet Protocol 
- HTTP - Hyper Text Transfer Protocol 
- SMTP – Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
- TCP – Transmission Control Protocol
- UDP – User Datagram Protocol

A protocol suite is a collection of protocols that are designed to work together.

# 1. Wireshark

Wireshark is a widely-used open-source network protocol analyzer.

It captures and analyzes network traffic in real-time, helping in troubleshooting, security analysis, and network optimization.

**Key Features:**

- Deep inspection of hundreds of protocols. 

- Live traffic capture and offline analysis. 

- Ability to decrypt many protocols, including SSL/TLS.

**Why use WireShark:**

- Network Troubleshooting: Identify network issues, bottlenecks, and performance problems. 

- Security Analysis: Detect malicious activities, such as malware, DDoS attacks, and suspicious traffic.

- Protocol Development: Assist developers in debugging protocol implementations. 

- Real-Time Monitoring: Monitor network data in real-time for quick response to anomalies.


Filters in Wireshark help narrow down specific traffic of interest from a large dataset.

**Types of filters:**

Capture Filters: Applied during data capture, limiting the data being captured. Display Filters: 

Applied after capturing data, allowing for in-depth analysis of specific traffic.

**IP Filter**
```c
ip.addr == 192.168.1.1
```

**Port Filter**
```c
tcp.port == 80
```

**Protocol Filter**
```c
http
```

