Enumeration is a crucial phase in penetration testing where an attacker or ethical hacker actively gathers detailed information about a target system or network. This phase comes after reconnaissance and involves extracting valuable data such as usernames, system details, network shares, services, and more. The primary goal of enumeration is to discover potential attack vectors that can be exploited for unauthorized access.

Unlike passive reconnaissance, which involves collecting information without directly interacting with the target, enumeration is **active**—meaning the tester sends direct queries to the target system to retrieve specific information.

Enumeration can be used to gather any of the following information:

- Operating system details
- Network infrastructure details
- Usernames of valid users
- Machine names
- Share names
- Directory names
- Printer names
- Web server details

Enumeration is considered a crucial part of the penetration testing process as it provides an insight into metrics and outcomes that are directly used to craft exploits and test the system’s security flaws.

Some techniques used to discover security flaws include:

- Using default passwords to test the robustness of the authentication protocol
- Comprehensive authentication validation to prevent exploits of the authentication process
- Using email IDs to determine valid and invalid username entries
- Using Windows Active Directory to extract client workgroup information
- Leveraging IP tables and DNS entries to access information on domain structure, tool web links, device type, anonymous connections, and file shares across the network

Enumeration also helps penetration testers obtain detailed end-to-end information on what is to be tested in target hosts, allowing for a holistic assessment of the attack surface.

### Process of Enumeration

Enumeration is the process of identifying all hosts on a network. This can be done in several ways, but active and passive scanning is the most common method. Active scanning involves sending out requests and analyzing the responses to determine which hosts are active on the network. Passive scanning involves listening to traffic and then analyzing it to identify hosts.

Both methods have their advantages and disadvantages. Active scanning is more likely to identify all hosts on a network, but it is also more likely to cause disruptions because it generates a lot of traffic. Passive scanning is less likely to identify all hosts, but it is also less likely to cause disruptions because it does not generate any traffic.

## Classification of Enumeration Techniques

Enumeration techniques are classified according to the information they are used to obtain and the targeted systems. Categories include:

#### Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Enumeration

The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol is an internet standard that facilitates access to distributed directory services. LDAP is tied to the DNS server for faster query resolution and lookups. In a lightweight directory access protocol enumeration, penetration testers use directory scanners to locate network file shares, current users, affiliated organizations, and other directory listings within the system. One common testing mechanism is to leverage a penetration scanning tool for querying **TCP ports 389** and **636** to enumerate information such as valid usernames, organizational details, and addresses from LDAP servers.

#### NetBIOS Enumeration

The Network Basic Input Output System (NetBIOS) enables machines to communicate across the Local Area Network (LAN). As NetBIOS is responsible for assigning names to identify machines over a TCP/IP connection, a related enumeration enables the security team to obtain the list of computers within a domain, file shares on individual machines, organizational policies, and default passwords. This makes NetBIOS enumeration crucial for investigating security misconfigurations in sensitive accounts and shared resources.

#### Windows Enumeration

Considered the principal reconnaissance technique for Windows operating systems, this involves the security team connecting with desktop workstations either locally or from a remote machine and then profiling the machine using ***sysinternals*** tools.

Information that can be obtained using Windows enumeration tools includes:

- OS version
- Firewall configuration
- Directory structure
- Most recent patches/updates
- The machine’s domain
- Hostname
- Device drivers
- Device configuration
- Running processes
- Registry keys
- Scheduled tasks
- Cleartext password files

Although most enumeration processes are carried out using inbuilt utilities and commands, penetration testers can also use tools such as NMap, Metasploit, and rpcclient to obtain information on privileged accounts.

#### SNMP Enumeration

The Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) enables the exchange of management information between different network entities. The SNMP protocol tracks packets, errors and bytes transmitted, connection speed, and the number of requests to a web server. SNMP enumeration typically simulates an attack over SNMP agents of target devices, enabling security teams to gain unauthorized access to the **Management Information Base (MIB)** database containing network object records. This facilitates teams to identify devices, user accounts, passwords, client workgroups, and devices/system names within the network.

#### NTP Enumeration

The Network Time Protocol (NTP) synchronizes clocks between computers over variable-latency, packet-switched networks. The protocol runs on a computer’s **UDP port 123** and maintains a time synchronization of 10 milliseconds over the internet. NTP enumeration involves querying the NTP server for network information such as system names/IP addresses of hosts connected to the server and OS versions in the network’s clients. NTP enumeration also helps penetration testing teams to discover primary servers that allow system hosts to update their clocks without having to authenticate to the system.

#### DNS Enumeration

Domain Name Service (DNS) servers run a redundant, distributed, hierarchical database containing internet domain names and IP tables. The DNS server hosts records detailing the types of resources in the network within the DNS zone files. The service relies on DNS zone transfer to replicate the database across servers.

DNS enumeration involves locating an organization’s DNS servers and client domain entries. Through DNS enumeration, security teams can obtain the list of vulnerable machines’ device names, domain controllers, usernames, and IP addresses. Penetration testers commonly use zone transfers to obtain DNS entries and IP addresses susceptible to being downloaded in human-readable ASCII text.

---

### Services and Ports to Enumerate

The following are some of the most commonly used services and their associated ports:

-  FTP – 21
-  SSH – 22
-  HTTP – 80
-  HTTPS – 443
-  SMTP – 25
-  POP3 – 110
-  IMAP – 143
-  SNMP – 161
-  DNS Zone transfer - 53 
-  Microsoft RPC Endpoint Mapper - 135 
-  NetBIOS Name Service - 137 
-  NetBIOS session Service (SMB over NetBIOS) - 139 
-  SMB over TCP (Direct Host) - 445 
-  SNMP - 161 
-  LDAP - 389 
-  Global Catalog Service - 3368 
-  (SMTP) - 25  

As you can see, various services can run on any given port. Knowing which service runs on which port when enumerating a target machine is helpful.

---

## PRACTICAL SESSION

