
Git is the software that runs on your computer and manages your files.

**Git** is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency. 

Git allows group of people to work on the same project at the same time.

**GitHub** is an online platform that allows you to synchronise your local Git reporitory onto the web. 

You can also use GitHub to browse other people’s repositories and download code or documents without ever using Git.

### Installation of Git on Windows

2.2 Authentication with GitHub

**i. Configure your name and email address using following commands.** 

This information will be associated with your commits.

```bash
git config --global user.email "Your Email"
```

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
```

- Replace USERNAME with the username that you created on GitHub 

- Replace EMAIL with your email address


```bash
git config --list
```

- This command only shows the global settings.

---

**ii. Create Public and Private Key.**

```bash
ssh-keygen -t rsa -C "youremail.com"
```

Accept the default values. You do not need to create passphrase.

---


**iii. Check your key at location specified during key generation.** 

If you do not specify any location, by default the files will be stored at: 

`C:\Users\username\.ssh`

Two files will be created in this directory with default names - `id_rsa` and `id_rsa.pub.`

----

**iv. Open the pub file and copy everything from the file**



```bash
ssh -T git@github.com
```

- Testing your SSH connection


---

#### 2.1 If you are using Linux

You probably have Git installed already.

```bash
git --version
```


## Creating a Git repository

1. Create a directory for your project repository and enter that directory

2. Create some files and folders.

3. We now need to tell Git that this is a Git repository:

```bash
git init
```

## Adding files to your Git repository


```bash
git status
```

Untracked files are **those that are in the repo's directory but have not yet been added to the repo's index with git add**.

Check the current status of projects

```bash
git add notes.txt
```

You only need to do this when you have a new file that you want to track with Git.

Having specified that the file should be tracked, we need to tell Git that we have made changes to the file that we want it to record:

```bash
git commit -a -m "Initial version"
```

The `-a` tells Git to add the changes in this file to those that are being tracked by commit.

The `-m` specifies the text that follows in double-inverted commas is a comment (or message) briefly explaining what changes were made in this version.


We can also list what commits have been made: 

```bash
git log
```

This will list all the commits you have made with the comments that you specified with `-m`. 

The commit line in the output will be followed by a random string of characters — something like `b5526a8ddb40925e01620e751ecc97b735464444`. This is an identifier for a particular commit.

---






