The first thing you need to do is create yourself a GitHub account.

### Synchronizing your local Git repository with GitHub

-  Go to the `GitHub.com` web site and make sure you are logged in,

-  In the top right corner, you should find a `+ sign`. Click this and then click New repository,

-  Enter the name of your repository (`Notes`),

-  Add a description of your repository — something like “`Web Dev Notes`”,

-  Do not select the option to “`Initialize this repository with a README`”,

-  Click the button to `create` the repository.

These steps have created an empty repository on GitHub; you now need to synchronize your local repository with this.

```bash
git remote add origin git@github.com:USERNAME/Notes.git 
```

Replace USERNAME with your GitHub username in the following.

```bash
git push -u origin master
```

If you make a mistake in this command (such as not using the correct username or repository name), you can delete the remote repository and start again with:

```bash
git remote remove origin
```

From now on, after you make and commit changes, all you need to do is git push (without the -u origin master) to `push` your changes onto GitHub.

## Deleting and Renaming files

```bash
git mv notes.txt intro-notes.txt
```

```bash
git rm proteins.txt
```


---
## Undoing changes

```bash
git checkout -- notes.txt
```

Go back to the version without changes. The file will reverted back to what it was before you added the content.

If you have modified more than one file and want to reset everything to the last commit, you can also do this to reset all the files:

```bash
git reset --hard
```

---
## After you commit
 
Suppose however that you have committed a change and now want to undo that
change and revert to the previous version. 

You will recall that when you use:

```bash
git log 
```

You are shown the comments, but also shown lines saying commit with some apparently random set of letters and numbers.

This is an identifier for a particular commit.

```bash
git revert adbd940
```

`Note that the commit number that you supply is the one that you want to undo, not the one you want to get back to`

Exit `Vim Editor` pressing the `Esc key` and typing the characters: ` :wq`

`:wq` means write the file and quit.

Now push your changes to GitHub you committed a change and then reverted it which is effectively another commit. Git tracks everything, so even your mistake is tracked and can be got back again if needed.

NOTE:  `git revert` can be used to undo any commit — not just the most recent one. You simply specify the relevant commit identifier.

---

## Retrieving an old version

To obtain an older version of a particular file, you can use the command:

```bash
git checkout commitid -- filename
```

where `commitid` is the commit identifier of the version that we want to keep (i.e. the
commit containing the last good version of the file) and `filename` is the name of
the file you want to obtain. 

Having done this you would also need to commit the changes in the usual way with `git commit`.

To get back to an older version in the log history without actually undoing the changes between that version and the current version, we use:

```bash
git checkout commitid
```

Where `commitid` is the commit identifier of the version that you want to go back to.

To return to the latest commit:

```bash
git checkout master.
```

---
## Branching

Often we find that we have a version of a program (or script) that we are happy with, but we want to add some new feature(s). 

Whenever we make changes we risk breaking the existing version. Git allows us to create experimental ‘branches’ where we can develop new features before merging them back into the master repository.

We create a new branch using:

```bash
git checkout -b branchname 
```

where -b tells checkout to create a new branch.

```bash
git checkout -b newnotes
``` 

This has created a new branch and switched to using that branch. 

You can confirm which branch you are currently using:

```bash
git branch
```

If we are using GitHub, we need to tell Git to link this new branch to GitHub. We do this with the command:

```bash
 git push -u origin newnotes
```

If we wish to return to the `‘master/main’` branch we can do so with: 

```bash
git checkout master
```


```bash
git checkout main
```


---
## Checking differences between branches

We can use `diff` to look at differences between branches or commits.

```bash
git diff
```

`git diff master` This will show us the differences between the current (`‘newnotes’`) branch and the `‘master’` branch.

If we use `git diff` by itself (with no following parameter), it will show us differences from the most recent commit.

We can also use `git diff` with a commit identifier to see the differences between the current version and a specified commit or with two commit identifiers to see the differences between two specific commits.

```bash
git diff b5526a8dd
```

In any of these cases, if you are only interested in a particular file, just add the filename on the end as well.

```bash
git diff notes.txt
```


---
## Merging branches

Let’s suppose we are now happy with our changes in the `‘newnotes’` branch and want to merge it into the main (`‘master’`) branch. 

We simply check out the` ‘master’` branch and merge in the `‘newnotes’` branch:


```bash
git checkout master
```


```bash
git merge newnotes
```

---

## Deleting branches

To delete the `‘newnotes’` branch on the local machine, all that’s needed is:

```bash
git branch -d newnotes
```

To delete the branch on GitHub as well, we need the following two extra commands:

```bash
git push origin --delete newnotes 
```

```bash
git remote prune origin
```

---

## Tags and releases

We have already encountered the rather long-winded identifiers that are used to label particular commits.

However it would be much nicer for particular versions — perhaps those that we release to other people or those that we have used for the analysis that we publish in a paper — to be able to tag them with a much simpler label, typically a version number.

When we have a particular version checked out, we can tag it as follows:

```bash
git tag v1.0 
```

The first command specifies the tag that you wish to use for this version

```bash
git push --tags
```

The second command makes sure that GitHub knows about the tag too.

On GitHub, we can then create a `‘release’` of our repository. A release provides a ZIP file and a gzipped tar file that people can download.

To do this, follow these steps:

1. Visit your repository on GitHub
   
2. Once you have created a tag (‘v1.0’) and pushed it to GitHub as described above, you should see the text 1 release above the list of filenames in the repository. Click this text.

3. You will be taken to a screen where it lists the v1.0 release and on the right you will see a button labelled Draft a new release. Click this button.

4. Click in the box with the faint text ‘Tag version’ and type the tag you have used — as soon as you start typing the letter ‘v’ it should list your tag and you can click on it.

5. Enter a title for your release in the ‘Release title’ box — something like “First release version”

6. In the box below you can type some information about this release. Typically for a first release this again will be something like “first release”, but for subsequent versions you might provide a list of the changes since the previous version. A method for obtaining this is described below in Section 14.1.

7. Click the Publish release button at the bottom of the page.
   
   
GitHub will now return to the releases page which provides links where you can download the code as a ZIP file or gzipped tar file6.

`Note that these are not Git repositories, they are simply copies of the files as present in that tagged commit.`

---
## Summarizing your changes

The `git shortlog` command gives you the commit messages (the comments you provided with the `-m` option to `git commit`) without all the other information:

```bash
git shortlog
```

You can also obtain only the commit messages between two particular commits:

```bash
git shortlog commitid1..commitid2
```

The version that you have currently checked out can be abbreviated as `HEAD` so to find the changes between a particular commit and the current version, you can use: 

```bash
git shortlog commitid..HEAD
```

As usual tags are abbreviated ways of accessing commit identifiers, so if you have created a tag for a particular version, you can use the tag name instead of the commit identifier: 

```bash
git shortlog tag..HEAD
```

Consequently, when you create a new release (say ‘v1.1’), you can obtain the changes from the previous release (say ‘v1.0’) with: 

```bash
git shortlog v1.0..HEAD
```

---

## Downloading a repository

It is quite possible that you might have a copy of the repository on your laptop and another on a desktop computer — actually this is a really useful way of synchronizing and tracking changes across multiple machines keeping a backup on the cloud at the same time.

We will` ‘clone’` the repository so we have a second local copy in this other directory. Replace `USERNAME` with your GitHub username in the following:


```bash
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/GitExercise.git
```

You should find that you now have a GitExercise directory exactly as you had before.

---

## Managing multiple copies of a repository

Let's say some people have pulled our changes, made their own commits, and pushed them. We can check for changes on out Git repository and pull down any new changes.

```bash
git pull
```

You can now check that the new file is present and look at the updated log of commits that have been made:

```bash
git log
```

---

## Dealing with simple conflicts

Suppose you have changed a file on both copies of your repository. How can Git deal with that? If you have made distinct changes (to different parts of the file), Git can sort out the conflicts automatically; if the changes are to the same part of the file (usually the same line), Git will show you where the conflict occurs and you will have to sort it out manually.

Instead you must pull down the changes to merge them with what you have done before you can push:

```bash
git pull
```

This will automatically merge the changes on GitHub with the changes you have made locally.

Before we continue, we will go to the other repository and pull down the merged changes.

Both versions of the repository are now back in synchronization!

---

## Dealing with more complex conflicts

#### 1. Region of conflict

A **region of conflict** refers to a section of a file where multiple changes from different branches or contributors overlap and cannot be automatically merged. This happens when Git cannot determine which version to keep without manual intervention.

When two repositories have a different change to the same line of a file, Git cannot sort it out automatically. This indicates the region of conflict.

When a merge conflict occurs, Git marks the conflicting section in the file using special conflict markers:

```c
<<<<<<< HEAD 

Your changes in the current branch ======= Changes from the branch being merged 

>>>>>>> feature-branch
```

- **`<<<<<<< HEAD`** → Indicates the changes from your current branch (the branch you're merging into).
- **`=======`** → Separates the conflicting changes.
- **`>>>>>>> feature-branch`** → Shows the changes from the branch being merged.

#### Resolving Conflict Regions

1. Manually Edit the File

- Choose the correct version.
- Modify the content to integrate both changes if necessary.
- Remove conflict markers `(<<<<<<<, =======, >>>>>>>).`

2. Mark the Conflict as Resolved

- After editing, stage the file using:

```bash
git add <file>
```

- Commit the resolved changes:

```bash
git commit -m "Resolved merge conflict"
```

3. Use a Merge Tool (Optional)
   
You can use GUI-based tools like:

```bash
git mergetool
```


----


