Creating and managing databases in SQL involves various commands and concepts that handle the structuring, querying, and manipulation of data. 

A database consists of one or more tables.

We use SQL commands like **`CREATE DATABASE`** and **`DROP DATABASE`**, data manipulation commands such as `INSERT INTO` and `UPDATE`, as well as querying techniques using:
**`SELECT`**, **`WHERE`** and **aggregate functions**.

You will need special CREATE privileges to create or to delete a MySQL database.



**CREATE DATABASE**: Create a New Database
   
```sql
CREATE DATABASE school;
```

- This command creates a new database named "company."


**USE**: Select a Specific Database to Work With
   
```sql
USE school;
```

- This command selects the database named "company" for further operations.


**ALTER DATABASE**: Modify a Database's Attributes
   
```sql
ALTER DATABASE database_name
```

- The `ALTER TABLE` statement is used to add, delete, or modify columns in an existing table.

- The `ALTER TABLE` statement is also used to add and drop various constraints on an existing table.


**DROP DATABASE**: Delete an Existing Database
   
```sql
DROP DATABASE school;
```

- This command deletes the database named "company" and all its associated data.



## Create a MySQL Database Using MySQLi

The CREATE DATABASE statement is used to create a database in MySQL.

The following examples create a database named "myDB":

**Example (MySQLi Object-oriented)**

```php
<?php  
$servername = "localhost";  
$username = "username";  
$password = "password";  
  
// Create connection  
$conn = new mysqli($servername, $username, $password);  
// Check connection  
if ($conn->connect_error) {  
  die("Connection failed: " . $conn->connect_error);  
}  
  
// Create database  
$sql = "CREATE DATABASE myDB";  
if ($conn->query($sql) === TRUE) {  
  echo "Database created successfully";  
} else {  
  echo "Error creating database: " . $conn->error;  
}  
  
$conn->close();  
?>
```

**Note:** When you create a new database, you must only specify the first three arguments to the mysqli object (servername, username and password).  
  
**Tip:** If you have to use a specific port, add an empty string for the database-name argument, like this: new mysqli("localhost", "username", "password", "", port)