
JavaScript is the world's most popular programming language.

JavaScript is the programming language of the Web.

JavaScript is easy to learn.

#### Why Study JavaScript?

JavaScript is one of the 3 languages all web developers must learn:

   1. HTML to define the content of web pages

   2. CSS to specify the layout of web pages

   3. JavaScript to program the behavior of web pages

JavaScript is used in millions of Web pages to add functionality, validate forms, detect browsers, and much more.

JavaScript is the most popular scripting language on the Internet, and works in all major browsers, such as Internet Explorer, Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, and Opera.

- JavaScript was designed to add interactivity to HTML pages

- JavaScript is a scripting language

- A scripting language is a lightweight programming language

- JavaScript is usually embedded directly into HTML pages

- JavaScript is an interpreted language (means that scripts execute without preliminary compilation)

- Everyone can use JavaScript without purchasing a license

**Java** and **JavaScript** are two completely different languages in both concept and design.

Java (developed by Sun Microsystems) is a powerful and much more complex programming language - in the same category as C and C++.


#### What can a JavaScript Do

**JavaScript gives HTML designers a programming tool** - HTML authors are normally not
programmers, but JavaScript is a scripting language with a very simple syntax! Almost anyone can
put small "snippets" of code into their HTML pages

**JavaScript can put dynamic text into an HTML page** - A JavaScript statement like this below can write a variable text into an HTML page.

```javascript
document.write(<h1> + name + </h1>)
```

**JavaScript can react to events** - A JavaScript can be set to execute when something happens,
like when a page has finished loading or when a user clicks on an HTML element.

**JavaScript can read and write HTML elements** - A JavaScript can read and change the content
of an HTML element.

**JavaScript can be used to validate data** - A JavaScript can be used to validate form data before
it is submitted to a server. This saves the server from extra processing.

**JavaScript can be used to detect the visitor's browser** - A JavaScript can be used to detect the
visitor's browser, and - depending on the browser - load another page specifically designed for that browser.

**JavaScript can be used to create cookies** - A JavaScript can be used to store and retrieve
information on the visitor's computer.

---


In HTML, JavaScript code is inserted between `<script>` and `</script>` tags.

Example:

```javascript
<script>  
document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "My First JavaScript";  
</script>
```

Old JavaScript examples may use a type attribute: `<script type="text/javascript">`.  

The type attribute is not required. JavaScript is the default scripting language in HTML.

Scripts can also be placed in the `<body>`, or in the `<head>` section of an HTML page, or in both.

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<head>  
<script>  
function myFunction() {  
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "Paragraph changed.";  
}  
</script>  
</head>  
<body>

<h2>Demo JavaScript in Head</h2>  
  
<p id="demo">A Paragraph</p>  
<button type="button" onclick="myFunction()">Try it</button>

</body>  
</html>
```

A JavaScript `function` is placed in the `<body>` section of an HTML page.

The function is invoked (called) when a button is clicked:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h2>Demo JavaScript in Body</h2>  
  
<p id="demo">A Paragraph</p>  
  
<button type="button" onclick="myFunction()">Try it</button>  
  
<script>  
function myFunction() {  
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "Paragraph changed.";  
}  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

### External JavaScript

Scripts can also be placed in external files:

```javascript
function myFunction() {  
  document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = "Paragraph changed.";  
}
```

External scripts are practical when the same code is used in many different web pages.

JavaScript files have the file extension **.js**.

To use an external script, put the name of the script file in the `src` (source) attribute of a `<script>` tag:

```javascript
<script src="myScript.js"></script>
```

Placing scripts in external files has some advantages:

- It separates HTML and code
- It makes HTML and JavaScript easier to read and maintain
- Cached JavaScript files can speed up page loads

---
### External References

An external script can be referenced in 3 different ways:

- With a full URL (a full web address)
- With a file path (like /js/)
- Without any path

This example uses a **full URL** to link to myScript.js:

```javascript
<script src="https://www.w3schools.com/js/myScript.js"></script>
```

---

## JavaScript Display Possibilities

JavaScript can "display" data in different ways:

- Writing into an HTML element, using `innerHTML`.
  
- Writing into the HTML output using `document.write()`.
  
- Writing into an alert box, using `window.alert()`.
  
- Writing into the browser console, using `console.log()`.
  
  
## Using innerHTML

To access an HTML element, JavaScript can use the `document.getElementById(id)` method.

The `id` attribute defines the HTML element. The `innerHTML` property defines the HTML content:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h1>My First Web Page</h1>  
<p>My First Paragraph</p>  
  
<p id="demo"></p>  
  
<script>  
document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = 5 + 6;  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

Changing the `innerHTML` property of an HTML element is a common way to display data in HTML.

---

## Using document.write()

For testing purposes, it is convenient to use `document.write()`:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h1>My First Web Page</h1>  
<p>My first paragraph.</p>  
  
<script>  
document.write(5 + 6);  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

Using document.write() after an HTML document is loaded, will **delete all existing HTML**:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h1>My First Web Page</h1>  
<p>My first paragraph.</p>  
  
<button type="button" onclick="document.write(5 + 6)">Try it</button>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

The `document.write()` method should only be used for testing.

---

## Using window.alert()

You can use an alert box to display data:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h1>My First Web Page</h1>  
<p>My first paragraph.</p>  
  
<script>  
window.alert(5 + 6);  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

You can skip the `window` keyword.

In JavaScript, the window object is the global scope object. This means that variables, properties, and methods by default belong to the window object. This also means that specifying the `window` keyword is optional:

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<h1>My First Web Page</h1>  
<p>My first paragraph.</p>  
  
<script>  
alert(5 + 6);  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

---

## Using console.log()

For debugging purposes, you can call the `console.log()` method in the browser to display data.

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<script>  
console.log(5 + 6);  
</script>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

---

## JavaScript Print

JavaScript does not have any print object or print methods.

You cannot access output devices from JavaScript.

The only exception is that you can call the `window.print()` method in the browser to print the content of the current window.

```javascript
<!DOCTYPE html>  
<html>  
<body>  
  
<button onclick="window.print()">Print this page</button>  
  
</body>  
</html>
```

