JavaScript syntax is the set of rules, how JavaScript programs are constructed:

## JavaScript Values

The JavaScript syntax defines two types of values:

- Fixed values
- Variable values

Fixed values are called **Literals**.

Variable values are called **Variables**.

## JavaScript Literals

The two most important syntax rules for fixed values are:

1. **Numbers** are written with or without decimals:

2. **Strings** are text, written within double or single quotes:

## JavaScript Comments

Not all JavaScript statements are "executed".

Code after double slashes `//` or between `/*` and `*/` is treated as a **comment**.

Comments are ignored, and will not be executed:

```javascript
let x = 5;   // I will be executed  
  
// x = 6;   I will NOT be executed
```

## JavaScript Identifiers / Names

Identifiers are JavaScript names.

Identifiers are used to name variables and keywords, and functions.

The rules for legal names are the same in most programming languages.

A JavaScript name must begin with:

- A letter (A-Z or a-z)
- A dollar sign ($)
- Or an underscore (_)

Subsequent characters may be letters, digits, underscores, or dollar signs.

#### Note: 

- Numbers are not allowed as the first character in names.

- This way JavaScript can easily distinguish identifiers from numbers.

## JavaScript is Case Sensitive

All JavaScript identifiers are **case sensitive**. 

The variables `lastName` and `lastname`, are two different variables:

```javascript
let lastname, lastName;  
lastName = "Doe";  
lastname = "Peterson";
```

JavaScript does not interpret **LET** or **Let** as the keyword **let**.

## JavaScript and Camel Case

Historically, programmers have used different ways of joining multiple words into one variable name:

**Hyphens:**

`first-name, last-name, master-card, inter-city`.

**Hyphens are not allowed in JavaScript. They are reserved for subtractions.**
#### **Underscore:**

`first_name, last_name, master_card, inter_city`.

#### **Upper Camel Case (Pascal Case):**

`FirstName, LastName, MasterCard, InterCity`.

#### **Lower Camel Case:**

JavaScript programmers tend to use camel case that starts with a lowercase letter:

`firstName, lastName, masterCard, interCity`.

---

## JavaScript Character Set

JavaScript uses the **Unicode** character set.

Unicode covers (almost) all the characters, punctuations, and symbols in the world.

Unicode is a universal character set that defines all the characters needed for writing the majority of living languages in use on computers.

Unicode aims to be (and already is) a superset of all other encoded computer character sets.

The Unicode Standard covers (almost) all characters, punctuations, and symbols in the world and enables processing, storage, and transport of text independent of platform and language.