
A **computer program** is a list of "instructions" to be "executed" by a computer.

In a programming language, these programming instructions are called **statements**.

A **JavaScript program** is a list of programming **statements**.

In HTML, JavaScript programs are executed by the web browser.

---
## Semicolons ;

Semicolons separate JavaScript statements.

Add a semicolon at the end of each executable statement:

**Examples:**

```javascript
let a, b, c;  // Declare 3 variables  
a = 5;        // Assign the value 5 to a  
b = 6;        // Assign the value 6 to b  
c = a + b;    // Assign the sum of a and b to c  
```

When separated by semicolons, multiple statements on one line are allowed:

```javascript
a = 5; b = 6; c = a + b;
```

On the web, you might see examples without semicolons.  

Ending statements with semicolon is not required, but highly recommended.


## JavaScript White Space

JavaScript ignores multiple spaces. You can add white space to your script to make it more readable.

The following lines are equivalent:

```javascript
let person = "Hege";  
let person="Hege";
```

A good practice is to put spaces around operators ( = + - \* / ):

```javascript
let x = y + z;
```

---

## JavaScript Line Length and Line Breaks

For best readability, programmers often like to avoid code lines longer than 80 characters.

If a JavaScript statement does not fit on one line, the best place to break it is after an operator:

**Example:**

```javascript
document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML =  
"Hello Dolly!";
```

---

## JavaScript Code Blocks

JavaScript statements can be grouped together in code blocks, inside curly brackets {...}.

The purpose of code blocks is to define statements to be executed together.

One place you will find statements grouped together in blocks, is in JavaScript functions:

**Example:**

```javascript
function myFunction() {  
  document.getElementById("demo1").innerHTML = "Hello Dolly!";  
  document.getElementById("demo2").innerHTML = "How are you?";  
} 
``` 


## JavaScript Keywords

JavaScript statements often start with a **keyword** to identify the JavaScript action to be performed.

Here is a list of some of the keywords you will learn about in this tutorial:

| Keyword | Description |
| --- | --- |
| var | Declares a variable |
| let | Declares a block variable |
| const | Declares a block constant |
| if | Marks a block of statements to be executed on a condition |
| switch | Marks a block of statements to be executed in different cases |
| for | Marks a block of statements to be executed in a loop |
| function | Declares a function |
| return | Exits a function |
| try | Implements error handling to a block of statements |

JavaScript keywords are reserved words. Reserved words cannot be used as names for variables.
