## JavaScript Variables

Variables are "containers" for storing information.

JavaScript variables are used to hold values or expressions.

A variable can have a short name, like x, or a more descriptive name, like button.

Rules for JavaScript variable names:

- Variable names are case sensitive (y and Y are two different variables)

- Variable names must begin with a letter or the underscore character

**Note: Because JavaScript is case-sensitive, variable names are case-sensitive.**


A variable's value can change during the execution of a script. You can refer to a variable by its name to display or change its value.

```javascript
// Initial variable value
let x = 10;
console.log("Initial value of x:", x);

// Changing the value of the variable
x = 20;
console.log("New value of x:", x);

// Incrementing the value of the variable
x += 5;
console.log("After incrementing, x:", x);

// Decreasing the value of the variable
x -= 3;
console.log("After decrementing, x:", x);

```


#### Declaring (Creating) JavaScript Variables

Creating variables in JavaScript is most often referred to as "declaring" variables.

You can declare JavaScript variables with the `var` statement:

```javascript
var x;
var carname;
```

After the declaration shown above, the variables are empty (they have no values yet).

However, you can also assign values to the variables when you declare them:

```javascript
var x=5;
var carname="Scorpio";
```

After the execution of the statements above, the variable x will hold the `value 5`, and carname will hold the `value Scorpio`.

**Note: When you assign a text value to a variable, use quotes around the value.**


#### Assigning Values to Undeclared JavaScript Variables

If you assign values to variables that have not yet been declared, the variables will automatically be
declared.

These statements:

```javascript
x=5;
carname="Scorpio";
```

have the same effect as:

```javascript
var x=5;
var carname="Scorpio";
```


#### Redeclaring JavaScript Variables

If you redeclare a JavaScript variable, it will not lose its original value.

```javascript
var x=5;
var x;
```

After the execution of the statements above, the variable x will still have the value of 5. The value of x is not reset (or cleared) when you redeclare it.
