HTML events are **"things"** that happen to HTML elements.

When JavaScript is used in HTML pages, JavaScript can **"react"** on these events.

### HTML Events

An HTML event can be something the browser does, or something a user does.

Here are some examples of HTML events:

- An HTML web page has finished loading
- An HTML input field was changed
- An HTML button was clicked

Often, when events happen, you may want to do something.

JavaScript lets you execute code when events are detected.

HTML allows event handler attributes, **with JavaScript code**, to be added to HTML elements.

#### Common HTML Events

Here is a list of some common HTML events:

|Event|Description|
|---|---|
|onchange|An HTML element has been changed|
|onclick|The user clicks an HTML element|
|onmouseover|The user moves the mouse over an HTML element|
|onmouseout|The user moves the mouse away from an HTML element|
|onkeydown|The user pushes a keyboard key|
|onload|The browser has finished loading the page|

### Event Handlers

**Event Handlers** are JavaScript methods, i.e. functions of objects, that allow us as JavaScript programmers to control what happens when events occur.

Directly or indirectly, an **Event** is always the result of something a user does. For example, we've already seen Event Handlers like `onClick` and `onMouseOver` that respond to mouse actions. 

Another type of Event, an internal change-of-state to the page (completion of loading or leaving the page). An `onLoad` Event can be considered an indirect result of a user action.

The elements on a page which can trigger events are known as **"targets"** or **"target elements,"** and we can easily understand how a button which triggers a Click event is a target element for this event. 

Typically, events are defined through the use of Event Handlers, which are bits of script that tell the browser what to do when a particular event occurs at a particular target. These Event Handlers are commonly written as attributes of the target element's HTML tag.

**Example:**

The Event Handler for a Click event at a form field button element is quite simple to understand:

```html
<input type="button" name="click1" value="Click me" onClick="event_handler">
```

The `event_handler` portion of this example is any valid JavaScript and it will be executed when the specified event is triggered at this target element.

Event handlers can be used to handle and verify user input, user actions, and browser actions:

- Things that should be done every time a page loads
- Things that should be done when the page is closed
- Action that should be performed when a user clicks a button
- Content that should be verified when a user inputs data
- And more.

Many different methods can be used to let JavaScript work with events:

- HTML event attributes can execute JavaScript code directly
- HTML event attributes can call JavaScript functions
- You can assign your own event handler functions to HTML elements
- You can prevent events from being sent or being handled
- And more.
  
There are "three different ways" that Event Handlers can be used to trigger Events or Functions.



