Media queries are an effective and reliable way for developers to code responsive web designs.

A media query is a CSS technique that uses the `@media` rule to add a block of CSS properties when certain conditions are met. For example, if the screen size reaches a certain point, a media query indicates when to show _X_ instead of _Y_.

A media query consists of an optional media type (all, handheld, print, TV, and so on) and any number of optional expressions that limit when the query will trigger, such as width, pixel-density or device orientation. Media queries are part of CSS3 and enable developers to customize their content for different presentation mediums.

At the basic level, media queries allow a web developer to create responsive emails by detecting the width of the display. For responsive web design, coders use the `min-width` and `max-width` media queries.

### The max-width media query

A max-width media query triggers styles for smaller screens when the viewport or device width is **less than** a certain number or pixels. CSS styles are ordered from largest to smallest.

Here is an example of a max-width query:

```css
@media only screen and (max-width: 600px) {...}
```

What this query really means is, “If [device width] is _less than or equal to_ 600px, then do `{...}`.”

So, when a website is viewed on most mobile devices, it will apply the styles defined in the query. The styles will also be applied if a recipient adjusts the size of their browser window to less than 600px wide.

### The min-width media query

A min-width media query triggers styles for desktop screens when the viewport or device is **greater than** the defined number of pixels. It is the minimum width before styles start being applied. Here’s an example of a min-width query:

```css
@media only screen and (min-width: 600px) {...}
```

What this query really means is, “If [device width] is _greater than or equal to_ 600px, then do `{...}`“

So, if an email recipient views your campaign on a smartphone with a display less than 600 pixels wide, it _will not_ show the defined styles. In this situation, you code for the smaller screens first and used the media query to define desktop styles.

### Combining min-width and max-width media queries

Max-width and min-width can be used together to target a specific range of screen resolutions or viewport sizes. Use this approach when you want to target certain mobile devices with known widths. Here’s an example of using both min- and max-width in a media query.

```css
@media only screen and (max-width: 600px) and (min-width: 400px)  {...}
```

The query above will trigger only for screens that are _between 600px and 400px wide_. Want to figure out how to target a specific device based on the screen’s width?

## Breakpoints for media queries

The breakpoint is the screen width at which the design and layout of an HTML website or a web page will adapt to provide an optimal viewing experience.

Exactly what these should be set to is a matter of some debate amongst email developers.

iPhones and iPads provide us with a few easy breakpoints to start from. Coding styles for these specific clients will ensure emails look great on these screens. Android devices, on the other hand, vary widely in screen size because there are so many different manufacturers and devices. Jay Oram of ActionRocket (who wrote the original version of this guide) recommends creating two to four breakpoints, based on popular Apple devices, which will cover most devices.

Here are some of the most-common breakpoints :

|   |   |
|---|---|
|**Breakpoint Setting**|**For Device**|
|max-width 320px|Smartwatches|
|max-width 420px|Smaller devices|
|max-width 600px|Phones|
|min-width 600px|Tablets and Large Phones|
|min-width 768px|Tablets|
|min-width 992px|Laptops and Desktops|
|min-width 1200px|Monitors, Desktops|

Remember, **CSS rules that appear later in the embedded styles override earlier rules if both have the same specificity**. This means you’ll need to order media queries from either largest to smallest or vice versa – depending on whether you use min-width or max-width.

**Here is an example order for the max-width approach:**

- Desktop styles (not in a media query)
- Tablet styles (max-width: 768px)
- Mobile styles (max-width: 414px)

