CSS selectors are used to "find" (or select) the HTML elements you want to style.

We can divide CSS selectors into five categories:

**Simple selectors** (select elements based on name, id, class)

**Combinator selectors** (select elements based on a specific relationship between them)

**Pseudo-class selectors** (select elements based on a certain state)

**Pseudo-elements selectors** (select and style a part of an element)

**Attribute selectors** (select elements based on an attribute or attribute value)

### Example

```css
p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

All `<p>` elements on the page will be `center-aligned`, with a `red text color`.

## The CSS id Selector

The id selector uses the id attribute of an HTML element to select a specific element.

The id of an element is unique within a page, so the id selector is used to select one unique element!

To select an element with a specific id, write a hash (#) character, followed by the id of the element.

### Example

```css
#para1 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

The CSS rule below will be applied to the HTML element with id="para1"

**Note:** An id name cannot start with a number!

## The CSS class Selector

The class selector selects HTML elements with a specific class attribute.

To select elements with a specific class, write a period (.) character, followed by the class name.

### Example

```css
.center {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

All HTML elements with class="center" will be red and center-aligned.

You can also specify that only specific HTML elements should be affected by a class.

```css
p.center {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

only `<p>` elements with `class="center"` will be red and center-aligned.

**Note:** A class name cannot start with a number.

## The CSS Universal Selector

The universal selector `(*)` selects all HTML elements on the page.

```css
* {  text-align: center;  
  color: blue;}
```

The CSS rule will affect every HTML element on the page.

## The CSS Grouping Selector

The grouping selector selects all the HTML elements with the same style definitions.

Look at the following CSS code (the h1, h2, and p elements have the same style definitions)

```css
h1 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}  
  
h2 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}  
  
p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

To group selectors, separate each selector with a comma.
### Example

```css
h1, h2, p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

## All CSS Simple Selectors

| Selector             | Example      | Example description                             |
| -------------------- | ------------ | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `#id`                | `#firstname` | Selects the element with id="firstname"         |
| `.class`             | .intro       | Selects all elements with class="intro"         |
| `*`                  | *            | Selects all elements                            |
| `element`            | p            | Selects all <p> elements                        |
| `element,element,..` | div, p       | Selects all <div> elements and all <p> elements |
