## CSS Comments

Comments are used to explain the code, and may help when you edit the source code at a later date.

Comments are ignored by browsers.

A CSS comment is placed inside the `<style>` element, and starts with `/*` and ends with `*/`:

```css
/* This is a single-line comment */  
p {  color: red;}
```

You can add comments wherever you want in the code:

```css
p {  color: red;  /* Set text color to red */}
```

```css
p {  color: /*red*/blue; }
```

Comments can also span multiple lines:

```css
/* This is  
a multi-line  
comment */  
  
p {  color: red;}
```

# CSS Colors

Colors are specified using predefined color names, or RGB, HEX, HSL, RGBA, HSLA values.

You can set the background color for HTML elements:

```html
<h1 style="background-color:DodgerBlue;">Hello World</h1>  
<p style="background-color:Tomato;">Lorem ipsum...</p>
```

You can set the color of text:

```html
<h1 style="color:Tomato;">Hello World</h1>  
<p style="color:DodgerBlue;">Lorem ipsum...</p>  
<p style="color:MediumSeaGreen;">Ut wisi enim...</p>
```

You can set the color of borders:

```html
<h1 style="border:2px solid Tomato;">Hello World</h1>  
<h1 style="border:2px solid DodgerBlue;">Hello World</h1>  
<h1 style="border:2px solid Violet;">Hello World</h1>
```

Colors can also be specified using RGB values, HEX values, HSL values, RGBA values, and HSLA values:

```html
<h1 style="background-color:rgb(255, 99, 71);">...</h1>  
<h1 style="background-color:#ff6347;">...</h1>  
<h1 style="background-color:hsl(9, 100%, 64%);">...</h1>  
  
<h1 style="background-color:rgba(255, 99, 71, 0.5);">...</h1>  
<h1 style="background-color:hsla(9, 100%, 64%, 0.5);">...</h1>
```

### CSS RGB Colors

An RGB color value represents RED, GREEN, and BLUE light sources.

In CSS, a color can be specified as an RGB value, using this formula:

rgb(_red,_ _green_, _blue_)

Each parameter (red, green, and blue) defines the intensity of the color between 0 and 255.

For example, rgb(255, 0, 0) is displayed as red, because red is set to its highest value (255) and the others are set to 0.

To display black, set all color parameters to 0, like this: rgb(0, 0, 0).

To display white, set all color parameters to 255, like this: rgb(255, 255, 255).

### CSS HEX Colors

A hexadecimal color is specified with: `#RRGGBB`, where the RR (red), GG (green) and BB (blue) hexadecimal integers specify the components of the color.

In CSS, a color can be specified using a hexadecimal value in the form:

`#rrggbb`

Where `rr` (red), gg (green) and bb (blue) are hexadecimal values between 00 and ff (same as decimal 0-255).

For example, `#ff0000`is displayed as red, because red is set to its highest value (ff) and the others are set to the lowest value (00).

To display black, set all values to 00, like this: `#000000`.

To display white, set all values to `ff`, like this: `#ffffff`.

### Digit HEX Value

Sometimes you will see a 3-digit hex code in the CSS source.

The 3-digit hex code is a shorthand for some 6-digit hex codes.

The 3-digit hex code has the following form:

`#rgb`

```css
body {  background-color: #fc9; /* same as #ffcc99 */}  
  
h1 {  color: #f0f; /* same as #ff00ff */}  
  
p {  color: #b58; /* same as #bb5588 */}
```

### HSL Value

HSL stands for hue, saturation, and lightness.

In CSS, a color can be specified using hue, saturation, and lightness (HSL) in the form:

`hsl(hue, saturation, lightness)`

Hue is a degree on the color wheel from 0 to 360. 0 is red, 120 is green, and 240 is blue.

Saturation is a percentage value. 0% means a shade of gray, and 100% is the full color.

Lightness is also a percentage. 0% is black, 50% is neither light or dark, 100% is white.

# CSS Backgrounds

The CSS background properties are used to add background effects for elements.

### background-color

The `background-color` property specifies the background color of an element.

```css
body {  background-color: lightblue;}
```

Here, the `<h1>`, `<p>`, and `<div>` elements will have different background colors:

```css
h1 {  background-color: green;}  
  
div {  background-color: lightblue;}  
  
p {  background-color: yellow;}
```

The `opacity` property specifies the opacity/transparency of an element. It can take a value from 0.0 - 1.0. The lower value, the more transparent:

```css
div { background-color: green;  
  opacity: 0.3;}
```

Transparency using RGBA:

```css
div { background: rgba(0, 128, 0, 0.3) /* Green background with 30% opacity */}
```

### background-image

The `background-image` property specifies an image to use as the background of an element.

By default, the image is repeated so it covers the entire element.

```css
body {  background-image: url("paper.gif");}
```

**Note:** When using a background image, use an image that does not disturb the text.

The background image can also be set for specific elements, like the `<p>` element:

```css
p {  background-image: url("paper.gif");}
```

### background-repeat

By default, the `background-image` property repeats an image both horizontally and vertically.

Some images should be repeated only horizontally or vertically, or they will look strange, like this:

```css
body {  background-image: url("gradient_bg.png");}
```

If the image above is repeated only horizontally (`background-repeat: repeat-x;`), the background will look better:

```css
body {  background-image: url("gradient_bg.png");  
  background-repeat: repeat-x;}
```

**Tip:** To repeat an image vertically, set `background-repeat: repeat-y;`

Showing the background image only once is also specified by the `background-repeat` property:

```css
body {  background-image: url("img_tree.png");  
  background-repeat: no-repeat;}
```

The `background-position` property is used to specify the position of the background image.

```css
body {  background-image: url("img_tree.png");  
  background-repeat: no-repeat;  
  background-position: right top;}
```

### background-attachment

The `background-attachment` property specifies whether the background image should scroll or be fixed (will not scroll with the rest of the page):

```css
body {  background-image: url("img_tree.png");  
  background-repeat: no-repeat;  
  background-position: right top;  
  background-attachment: fixed;}
```

The background image should scroll with the rest of the page:

```css
body {  background-image: url("img_tree.png");  
  background-repeat: no-repeat;  
  background-position: right top;  
  background-attachment: scroll;}
```

### background - Shorthand property

To shorten the code, it is also possible to specify all the background properties in one single property. This is called a shorthand property.

Instead of writing:

```css
body {  background-color: #ffffff;  
  background-image: url("img_tree.png");  
  background-repeat: no-repeat;  
  background-position: right top;}
```

You can use the shorthand property `background`:

```css
body {  background: #ffffff url("img_tree.png") no-repeat right top;}
```

When using the shorthand property the order of the property values is:

- `background-color`
- `background-image`
- `background-repeat`
- `background-attachment`
- `background-position`

It does not matter if one of the property values is missing, as long as the other ones are in this order. Note that we do not use the background-attachment property in the examples above, as it does not have a value.

