
A combinator is something that explains the relationship between the selectors.

A CSS selector can contain more than one simple selector. Between the simple selectors, we can include a combinator.

There are four different combinators in CSS:

- Descendant combinator (space)
- Child combinator (>)
- Next sibling combinator (+)
- Subsequent-sibling combinator (~)



#### Descendant Combinator

The descendant combinator matches all elements that are descendants of a specified element.

The following example selects all `<p>` elements inside `<div>` elements: 

``` css
div p {  background-color: yellow;}
```

#### Child Combinator (>)

The child combinator selects all elements that are the children of a specified element.

The following example selects all `<p>` elements that are children of a `<div>` element:


```css
div > p {  background-color: yellow;}
```


#### Next Sibling Combinator (+)

The next sibling combinator is used to select an element that is directly after another specific element.

Sibling elements must have the same parent element, and "adjacent" means "immediately following".

The following example selects the first `<p>` element that are placed immediately after `<div>` elements:


```css
div + p {  background-color: yellow;}
```

#### Subsequent-sibling Combinator (~)

The subsequent-sibling combinator selects all elements that are next siblings of a specified element.

The following example selects all `<p>` elements that are next siblings of `<div>` elements: 

```css
div ~ p {  background-color: yellow;}
```


---

## CSS Pseudo-classes

A pseudo-class is used to define a special state of an element.

For example, it can be used to:

- Style an element when a user moves the mouse over it
- Style visited and unvisited links differently
- Style an element when it gets focus
- Style valid/invalid/required/optional form elements

  
**Syntax**

The syntax of pseudo-classes:

```css
selector:pseudo-class {  property: value;}
```

## Anchor Pseudo-classes

Links can be displayed in different ways:

**Example**

```css
/* unvisited link */
a:link {  color: #FF0000;}

 /* visited link */ 
a:visited {  color: #00FF00;}

/* mouse over link */
a:hover {  color: #FF00FF;}

/* selected link */
a:active {  color: #0000FF;}

```
  

**Note:** `a:hover` MUST come after `a:link` and `a:visited` in the CSS definition in order to be effective! `a:active` MUST come after `a:hover` in the CSS definition in order to be effective! Pseudo-class names are not case-sensitive.

#### Pseudo-classes and HTML Classes

Pseudo-classes can be combined with HTML classes:

When you hover over the link in the example, it will change color:

#### Hover on `<div>`

An example of using the `:hover` pseudo-class on a `<div>` element:

```css
a.highlight:hover {  color: #ff0000;}
```

---

## The :first-child Pseudo-class

The `:first-child` pseudo-class matches a specified element that is the first child of another element.

#### Match the first `<p>` element

In the following example, the selector matches any `<p>` element that is the first child of any element:

```css
p:first-child {  color: blue;}
```

#### Match the first `<i>` element in all `<p>` elements

In the following example, the selector matches the first `<i>` element in all `<p>` elements:

```css
p i:first-child {  color: blue;}
```

#### Match all `<i>` elements in all first child `<p>` elements

In the following example, the selector matches all `<i>` elements in `<p>` elements that are the first child of another element:

```css
p:first-child i {  color: blue;}
```


---

## The :lang Pseudo-class

The `:lang` pseudo-class allows you to define special rules for different languages.

If you're developing a website that needs to support multiple languages, the CSS lang selector can be incredibly helpful. 

This tool allows you to tailor your HTML element styles based on language. Imagine you want a certain font-family to be used only for a particular language - the CSS lang selector makes this possible.

In the example below, `:lang` defines the quotation marks for `<q>` elements with lang="no":

**Example**

```html

<html\>  
<head\>  
<style\>  
p:lang(en-US) {
  outline: 2px solid deeppink;
} 
</style\>  
</head\>  
<body\>

<p lang="pl-PL">
  Gdy widzimy znak z narysowaną czaszką i napisem <strong lang="en-US">DANGER</strong> to lepiej nie wchodzić do środka.
</p>

</body\>  
</html\>

```

---

## CSS Pseudo-elements


A CSS pseudo-element is used to style specific parts of an element.

For example, it can be used to:

- Style the first letter or line, of an element
- Insert content before or after an element
- Style the markers of list items
- Style the viewbox behind a dialog box

**Syntax**

The syntax of pseudo-elements:

```css
selector::pseudo-element {  property: value;}
```

## The ::first-line Pseudo-element

The `::first-line` pseudo-element is used to add a special style to the first line of a text.

The following example formats the first line of the text in all `<p>` elements:

**Example** 

```css
p::first-line {  color: #ff0000;  
  font-variant: small-caps;}
```


**Note:** The `::first-line` pseudo-element can only be applied to block-level elements.

The following properties apply to the `::first-line` pseudo-element:

- font properties
- color properties
- background properties
- word-spacing
- letter-spacing
- text-decoration
- vertical-align
- text-transform
- line-height
- clear

**Notice the double colon notation -** `::first-line` versus `:first-line`

---
## The ::first-letter Pseudo-element

The `::first-letter` pseudo-element is used to add a special style to the first letter of a text.

The following example formats the first letter of the text in all `<p>` elements: 

**Note:** The `::first-letter` pseudo-element can only be applied to block-level elements.

The following properties apply to the ::first-letter pseudo- element: 

- font properties
- color properties
- background properties
- margin properties
- padding properties
- border properties
- text-decoration
- vertical-align (only if "float" is "none")
- text-transform
- line-height
- float
- clear

### Pseudo-elements and HTML Classes

Pseudo-elements can be combined with HTML classes: 

### Multiple Pseudo-elements

Several pseudo-elements can also be combined.

In the following example, the first letter of a paragraph will be red, in an xx-large font size. The rest of the first line will be blue, and in small-caps. The rest of the paragraph will be the default font size and color:

**Example**

```css
p::first-letter {  color: #ff0000;  
  font-size: xx-large;}

p::first-line {  color: #0000ff;  
  font-variant: small-caps;}
```

---

## The ::before Pseudo-element

The `::before` pseudo-element can be used to insert some content before the content of an element.

The following example inserts an image before the content of each `<h1>` element:

```css
h1::before {  content: url(smiley.gif);}
```

## The ::after Pseudo-element

The `::after` pseudo-element can be used to insert some content after the content of an element.

The following example inserts an image after the content of each `<h1>` element:

```css
h1::after {  content: url(smiley.gif);}
```

## The ::marker Pseudo-element

The `::marker` pseudo-element selects the markers of list items.

The following example styles the markers of list items:

```css
::marker {  color: red;  
  font-size: 23px;}
```

---
## The ::selection Pseudo-element

The `::selection` pseudo-element matches the portion of an element that is selected by a user.

The following CSS properties can be applied to `::selection`: `color`, `background`, `cursor`, and `outline`.

The following example makes the selected text red on a yellow background:

```css
::selection {  color: red;  
  background: yellow;}
```

---


