CSS selectors are used to "find" (or select) the HTML elements you want to style.

We can divide CSS selectors into five categories:

**Simple selectors** (select elements based on name, id, class)

**Combinator selectors** (select elements based on a specific relationship between them)

**Pseudo-class selectors** (select elements based on a certain state)

**Pseudo-elements selectors** (select and style a part of an element)

**Attribute selectors** (select elements based on an attribute or attribute value)

### Example

```css
p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

All `<p>` elements on the page will be `center-aligned`, with a `red text color`.

## The CSS id Selector

The id selector uses the id attribute of an HTML element to select a specific element.

The id of an element is unique within a page, so the id selector is used to select one unique element!

To select an element with a specific id, write a hash (#) character, followed by the id of the element.

### Example

```css
#para1 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

The CSS rule below will be applied to the HTML element with id="para1"

**Note:** An id name cannot start with a number!

## The CSS class Selector

The class selector selects HTML elements with a specific class attribute.

To select elements with a specific class, write a period (.) character, followed by the class name.

### Example

```css
.center {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

All HTML elements with class="center" will be red and center-aligned.

You can also specify that only specific HTML elements should be affected by a class.

```css
p.center {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

only `<p>` elements with `class="center"` will be red and center-aligned.

**Note:** A class name cannot start with a number.

## The CSS Universal Selector

The universal selector `(*)` selects all HTML elements on the page.

```css
* {  text-align: center;  
  color: blue;}
```

The CSS rule will affect every HTML element on the page.

## The CSS Grouping Selector

The grouping selector selects all the HTML elements with the same style definitions.

Look at the following CSS code (the h1, h2, and p elements have the same style definitions)

```css
h1 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}  
  
h2 {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}  
  
p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```

To group selectors, separate each selector with a comma.
### Example

```css
h1, h2, p {  text-align: center;  
  color: red;}
```


## The CSS `attribute` Selector

The `[attribute]` selector is used to select elements with a specified attribute.

```css
input[placeholder] {  background-color: yellow;}
```

The `[attribute="value"]` selector is used to select elements with a specified attribute and value.

```css
a[target="_blank"] {  background-color: yellow;}
```

The `[attribute~="value"]` selector is used to select elements with an attribute value containing a specified word.

```css
[title~="flower"] {  border: 5px solid yellow;}
```

The `[attribute|="value"]` selector is used to select elements with the specified attribute, whose value can be exactly the specified value, or the specified value followed by a hyphen (-).

```css
[class|="top"] {  background: yellow;}
```

```html
<h1 class="top-header">Welcome</h1>
<p class="top-text">Hello world!</p>
<p class="topcontent">Are you learning CSS?</p>
```

The `[attribute^="value"]` selector is used to select elements with the specified attribute, whose value starts with the specified value.

```css
[class^="top"] {  background: yellow;}
```

```html
<h1 class="top-header">Welcome</h1>
<p class="top-text">Hello world!</p>
<p class="topcontent">Are you learning CSS?</p>
```

The `[attribute$="value"]` selector is used to select elements whose attribute value ends with a specified value.

```css
[class$="test"] {  background: yellow;}
```

```html
<div class="first_test">The first div element.</div>
<div class="second">The second div element.</div>
<div class="my-test">The third div element.</div>
<p class="mytest">This is some text in a paragraph.</p>
```

The `[attribute*="value"]` selector is used to select elements whose attribute value contains a specified value.

```css
[class*="te"] {  background: yellow;}
```

```html
<div class="first_test">The first div element.</div>
<div class="second">The second div element.</div>
<div class="my-test">The third div element.</div>
<p class="mytest">This is some text in a paragraph.</p>
```

---

## Styling Forms

The attribute selectors can be useful for styling forms without class or ID:

```css
input[type="text"] {
  width: 150px;
  display: block;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
  background-color: yellow;
}

input[type="button"] {
  width: 120px;
  margin-left: 35px;
  display: block;
}
```

**HTML Code:**

```html
<form name="input" action="" method="get">
  Firstname:<input type="text" name="Name" value="Peter" size="20">
  Lastname:<input type="text" name="Name" value="Griffin" size="20">
  <input type="button" value="Example Button">
</form>
```